docs: Add topics about hardening Alloy deployments. (#6386)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/access_permissions/_index.md

That work requires read access to logs, process data, and cluster resources, plus credentials for remote write and similar endpoints.
Your configuration determines which permissions {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} needs, and your deployment platform determines how you enforce them.

The following settings are common permission options.
Not every item applies to every configuration or platform.
Use only what matches your components and environment.

1. When your components allow it, run {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} as a non-root user on [Linux][linux], [Kubernetes][kubernetes], or a dedicated service account on [Windows][windows].
1. If you don't need remote access to the UI or `/metrics`, restrict the HTTP server to `127.0.0.1` or a private network address with the [`http` block][http-block].
1. When you expose the HTTP server beyond localhost, enable TLS with the [`http` block][http-block].
1. Use TLS for outbound remote write and OTLP connections with the [`tls` block][tls-block].
1. Avoid `insecure_skip_verify = true` in production.
   Refer to the [`tls` block][tls-block].
1. Store credentials outside configuration files when you can.

>    Refer to [Types and values][types-values].

Reviewer: It's ok to have a link to "Types and values" for now, but in the future it'd be so nice to have a page in the new Access & Permissions category solely dedicated to best practices with accessing secrets. It could show how to get them from vault, from an env var, how to use the coalesce std lib funtion, etc.

Author: Created https://github.com/grafana/alloy/issues/6435 to track this

1. On Kubernetes, set RBAC to the permissions your configuration uses.
   Refer to [Access and permissions on Kubernetes][kubernetes].
1. For container deployments, set `readOnlyRootFilesystem: true` when your volume mounts and components allow it.
   Refer to [Access and permissions on Kubernetes][kubernetes].
1. For container deployments, set `allowPrivilegeEscalation: false` when your components don't need privilege escalation.
   Refer to [Access and permissions on Kubernetes][kubernetes].

> 1. Don't use eBPF components unless your use case requires them.

Reviewer: This could be rephrased as something like "components which require elevated access should be ran in an Alloy instance dedicated to them". BPF is widely regarded as safe, and we don't want to discourage people from using it. It's just that they need a bit more guardrails.

   Refer to [Components that require elevated access](#components-that-require-elevated-access).

## Process identity and privilege

Create a dedicated service account or user on your deployment platform:

- [Access and permissions on Linux][linux]: systemd service, file permissions, and the `alloy` user
- [Access and permissions on Kubernetes][kubernetes]: `securityContext`, non-root UID, and RBAC

> - [Access and permissions on Windows][windows]: service accounts, Windows security groups, and filesystem ACLs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Linux][linux]: systemd service, file permissions, and the `alloy` user
- [Kubernetes][kubernetes]: `securityContext`, non-root UID, and RBAC
- [Windows][windows]: service accounts, Windows security groups, and filesystem ACLs
```

No need to repeat "Access and permissions"?

## Network exposure

{{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} runs an HTTP server for its UI, API, and `/metrics` endpoint.
The binary binds to `127.0.0.1:12345` by default, which limits exposure to the local machine.
The Grafana Helm chart sets `alloy.listenAddr` to `0.0.0.0` by default so other Pods can reach the container on port `12345`.
Review what you expose before you change either default.

## Secrets and credentials

You can load secrets at runtime through several patterns:

> - `sys.env()` in configuration to reference environment variables

Reviewer: There could be a link to the [reference doc](https://deploy-preview-alloy-6386-zb444pucvq-vp.a.run.app/docs/alloy/latest/reference/stdlib/sys/#sysenv). But it might be even better if there's a dedicated page for secret management, with examples?

Author: Created #6435 to track this

   Refer to [Secure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} on Kubernetes][kubernetes].
1. Don't use eBPF components unless your use case requires them.
   Refer to [Components that require elevated access](#components-that-require-elevated-access).

## Process identity and privilege

Create a dedicated service account or user on your deployment platform:

- [Secure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} on Linux][linux]: systemd service, file permissions, and the `alloy` user
- [Secure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} on Kubernetes][kubernetes]: `securityContext`, non-root UID, and OpenShift Security Context Constraints
- [Secure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} on Windows][windows]: service accounts, Windows security groups, and filesystem ACLs

## Network exposure

{{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} runs an HTTP server for its UI, API, and `/metrics` endpoint.
The binary binds to `127.0.0.1:12345` by default, which limits exposure to the local machine.
The Grafana Helm chart sets `alloy.listenAddr` to `0.0.0.0` by default so other Pods can reach the container on port `12345`.
Review what you expose before you change either default.

## Secrets and credentials

> {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} loads secrets at runtime through several patterns:

Reviewer: This sentence makes it sound like secrets are always loaded. But they're only loaded if those functionalities are used. Maybe it's better to rephrase it to something like "you can load secrets using..."

- `sys.env()` in configuration to reference environment variables
- [`remote.vault`][remote-vault] to load secrets from HashiCorp Vault
- Secrets from the cluster: [remote.kubernetes.secret][remote-k8s-secret]
- [`remote.s3`][remote-s3] to load configuration or secrets from AWS S3

For `secret`-typed values at runtime and protection from exposure in the UI and component exports, refer to [Types and values][types-values].

> ## Components that require elevated access

Reviewer: Should this table be here? Is it not better to have a Security section in the reference docs of the components? It's very easy for people to forget to update this page. Also, the component reference pages already have security-related info which could use a better organisation.

Author: Dropped the table and added a link to the component docs instead. Any access/permissions can be explicitly documented per component that requires something beyond the default

Some components need root, extra capabilities, or group membership.

| Component                  | Requirement                        | Notes                                                        |
| -------------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `beyla.ebpf`               | Root or Linux capabilities         | Kernel-level eBPF. Incompatible with strict non-root setups. |

> | `prometheus.exporter.unix` | Read access to `/proc`, `/sys`     | Usually satisfied by the `alloy` user on Linux.              |

Reviewer: What is "the alloy user on linux"?

Author: The table has been dropped.

| `loki.source.journal`      | `adm` and `systemd-journal` groups | The package installer adds the `alloy` user to both groups.  |

> | `loki.source.file`         | Read access to target log paths    | Grant per-path ACLs instead of broad permissions.            |

Reviewer: What is ACL?

Author: ACLs is like RBAC?  It's dropped when the table was removed.,

> | `pyroscope.ebpf`           | Root or Linux capabilities         | Same constraint as `beyla.ebpf`.                             |

Reviewer: It's not exactly the same. It's the same in the sense that it requires "root". It's not the same in the sense that it doesn't require eBPF capabilities. 

"root" is whether the user is 0. Usually that user has all capabilities, but that's not guaranteed. In theory you can even restrict the 0 user from doing things.
